A box about the importance of the GP map

What can go wrong if data are interpreted in light of a simple GP map?

--------------

Box 1

Ever more powerful methods to detect selection at the sequence level allow the identification of portions of the genome putatively under divergent selection.

Framework predicts that there are loci under divergent selection to be found across the genome.

That prediction comes directly from the additive view of the GP map.

One premise of this is that the key is in what differs between two species (whether it is genetic or even other things like expression patterns or epigenetic markers).

These are of course important but is may also be possible that parts of the genome that are not divergent are just as important because they act as modifiers of the parts that are divergent ---- maybe allowing them to diverge in the first place.

Epistasis, for example, is a common source of deviation from additivity in real life GP maps. If we imagine the following situation (show figure) then it becomes clear that for the divergent genes to become divergent all the other genes must fix in a particular configuration. If speciation is driven by selection, then there will be directional selection on that genetic background to fix in that suitable configuration, as well as divergent selection at the diverged genes. This means that only looking at the divergent genes may only give a very incomplete view of the "genetic basis" of speciation, as a lot of other elements may have to be in place too, depending on the GP map.

Why is this important? For a few reasons. First, how complex are all the elements that must be in place but remain hidden may be a strong determinant of how likely speciation is at all, and focusing more on this "dark matter" of speciation genomics may turn the field into a more predictive science.

The point is that to understand the genetic changes that lead to two species just focusing on the things that differ between the two species, while most accessible, may only give a small part of the story.

----------------

Selection on the background to introgress may be just as important.

What if the genes that diverge are all interacting together and must be present together in order to produce branching.

Fisher's heritage and the averaging out of complexity

The things that really matter might be at other levels of the GP map than the genes (e.g. changes in epigenetic markers and expression).

